API section (#139)
infinum/rails-handbook: API/Intro.md

APIs are sets of defined protocols enabling applications to communicate with other systems, that can also be applications. In the context of the Web, APIs are a way for Web clients (browsers, mobile apps, terminals, servers, and other platforms) to communicate with Web servers.

Our APIs use the HTTP protocol and are usually in JSON format, but if necessary, we might implement file uploads, XML or something else the project requires.

The following chapters provide information on our practices regarding JSON APIs. Although some gems are mentioned throughout, primary focus is on aspects surrounding API design and delivery.

## API design principles

Before talking about specific topics like authentication and pagination, we should outline a set of principles all APIs should follow. Since it's challenging to understand generic definitions, all of the principles will be introduced with an example showing what happens when they're *not* followed to try to illustrate the importance of following them.

> *Note*: all of the examples below are inspired by situations developers have been in when dealing with terrible APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: all the examples below are inspired by situations developers have found themselves in when dealing with terrible APIs.
```

Author: thanks! One more [grammar rule](https://www.grammar-monster.com/lessons/all_of.htm) to remember :D

### Predictable

> When we call an API "predictable", what we mean is that it never aims to surprise the client. As an example, let's take an imaginary API endpoint for retrieving song details:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we mean by "predictable API" is that it never aims to surprise the client. As an example, let's take an imaginary API endpoint for retrieving a song's details:
```

Fortunately, the remedy is simple: communicate with your clients. Anticipate that a change might break client applications and tell them about it in advance.

### Consistent design

Let's imagine an API endpoint which returns country data:

```json
// GET api/countries/hrv
{
  "Ime": "Croatia",
  "nativeName": "Hrvatska",
  "top_level_domain": ".hr"
}
```

What's the issue here? As you can see, the API is using different naming conventions for attributes:

* `Ime` - Croatian PascalCase
* `nativeName` - English camelCase
* `top_level_domain` - English snake_case

The problem is not the choice of cases (every option is good), nor the language, but the inconsistency. When building an API, pick one style and stick with it.

This doesn't apply just to request and response bodies, URLs are also subject to consistency rules, e.g. endpoints `/api/country_data` and `/api/currency-data` are bad design because they're mixing snake_case and kebab-case.

### Following conventions and standards

Here is an example of an endpoint which returns album data:

```json
// GET api/albums/123
{
  "name": "Elephant",

>   "explicit": "false",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "explicit": "false"
```

}
```

The API serializes the attribute `explicit` which tells the client if the album contains strong language. This has been implemented as a boolean field, however the API developer decided to stringify the boolean, so instead of returning `false`, they return `"false"`.

### Performant

As the project grows, the user base will also grow, thus increasing the amount of requests sent to your server. Without a fast and optimized API, the response times will sky-rocket and the user experience will plummet, which might cause users to delete their accounts and abandon your product.

> There are many ways to improve the performance of an API, from caching to database sharding, but please be aware that the amount of information fetched from the database and wrapped in an API response should be as small as it can be, so increasing the speed of SQL queries and avoiding any [performance issues](https://infinum.com/handbook/books/devproc/general-coding-practices/api-design#performance-issues) are crucial measures that should always be undertaken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to improve the performance of an API, from caching to database sharding, but please be aware that the amount of information fetched from the database and wrapped in an API response should be as small as it can be. Increasing the speed of SQL queries and avoiding any [performance issues](https://infinum.com/handbook/books/devproc/general-coding-practices/api-design#performance-issues) are crucial measures that should always be undertaken.
```

### Robust

> A strong, healthy and flexible API is a delight to work with. This goes for the producers as well as the consumers of the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A strong, healthy, and flexible API is a delight to work with. This goes for the producers as well as the consumers of the API.
```

To have a robust API, you'll need to ensure:

- a nice interface: existing behaviour is easily applicable throughout the system (e.g.: new filter or sort option)
- bad requests don't cause problems for subsequent usages
- integration tests that go through every endpoint and supported behaviour before deploying new builds

### Debuggable

> Delivering a feature usually entails many steps that have to be resolved before shipping to production. When the project is split into *backend* and *frontend*, it often results in time spent communicating how an API is working. This time increases especially if the consumer of the API doesn't understand something and wastes time debugging a certain endpoint or collection of endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delivering a feature usually entails many steps that have to be resolved before shipping to production. When the project is split into *backend* and *frontend*, it often results in time spent communicating how an API is working. This time increases, especially if the API's consumer doesn't understand something and wastes time debugging a certain endpoint or a collection of endpoints.
```
